MATTERHORN

*The cover page lists authors who are members of the product owner team and executed the vision for Matterhorn 1.0. Additional authors of this work include our numerous committers and designers

Opencast Matterhorn 1.1: Reaching New Heights*

Christopher A. Brooks
University of Saskatchewan

Markus Ketterl
Universität Osnabrück

Adam Hochman
University of California at Berkeley

Josh Holtzman
University of California at Berkeley

Judy Stern
University of California at Berkeley

Tobias Wunden
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich

Kristofor Amundson, Greg Logan, Kenneth Lui, Adam McKenzie, Denis Meyer, Markus Moormann, Matjaz Rihtar, Ruediger Rolf, Nejc Skofic, Micah Sutton, Ruben Perez Vazquez, and Benjamin Wulff.

What is Matterhorn?

Matterhorn is a free, open-source, enterprise-ready platform that supports the management of educational audio and video content. Institutions use Matterhorn to produce automated lecture recordings, manage existing video, serve designated distribution channels, and provide user interfaces to engage students with content.

Matterhorn is extensible, scalable, and runs on a variety of different hardware platforms and configurations.  Several commercial and support vendors exist and provide portions of the Matterhorn lecture capture toolchain, allowing institutions to choose the level of support that best fits their needs.

The Matterhorn Environment:

1. Lecture Capture and Administration
focus is on the activities around the aquisition of content
user generated content (uploading video) is supported as well as the recording of new content using special purpose Matterhorn devices (capture agents)
scheduling of recordings is done through standards-based iCal feeds, resulting in low coupling between recording devices and the rest of the system
standard definition, high definition, VGA projected content, and multichannel audio are all supported depending on the device configuration being used

28 adopting institutions as of November 2011.


What can Matterhorn do for:

Students:
enable anytime learning, letting students choose when and how they want to consume lecture content
encourage thought and participation in the classroom instead of rote transcription
connect students at a distance to those in the classroom, removing barriers of geographic location
help provide an environment for purposeful reflection, where students reconsider lectures before asking questions

Instructors:
create copies of lectures with no interaction from instructors, thus enhancing the teaching and learning process without increasing demands on instructor time
give oppourtuntities for pedagogical reflection and review of teaching, allowing instructors to reflect on their methods of lecturing
reduce demands on instructors to provide material to students who missed it

Institution:
allows IT professionals to leverage existing systems to enable lecture capture on physical, virtual, or cloud environments
strengthens the robustness of the academic mission by providing alternative delivery forms in case of disaster, pandemic, or other emergency

Researchers:
allows media researchers to test innovations in a broadly used multimedia{fn} environment while focusing only on the aspect of the system that is novel to them
encourages the movement of research results out of the lab and into wide-scale production
enabled non-technical researchers such as those in the social sciences, humanities, and arts, to carry out media-related inquiry without having to build robust systems

{fn} Individual institutions usage varries with some reporting tens of gigabytes of lecture content created daily and thousands of students using the system over an academic term. 


C. A. Brooks, C. Demmans Epp, G. Logan, and J. Greer. The Who, What, When, and Why of Lecture Capture. In 1st International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge 2011 (LAK'11), 2010. 

M. Ketterl, J. Emden, and O. Vornberger. Using social navigation for multimedia content suggestion. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE Fourth International Conference on Semantic Computing, ICSC '10, pages 448-449, Washington, DC, USA, 2010. IEEE Computer Society.

M. Ketterl, R. Mertens, and O. Vornberger. Bringing web 2.0 to web lectures. International Journal of Interactive Technology and Smart Education, 6(2):82-96, 2009.

M. Ketterl, O. A. Schulte, and A. Hochman. Opencast matterhorn: A community-driven open source software project for producing, managing, and distributing academic video. Interact. Techn. Smart Edu., 7(3):168-180, 2010.

OPENCAST

Opencast is a community of individuals, higher education institutions and organizations working together to explore, develop, define and document best practices and technologies for management of audiovisual content in academia. The community shares experiences with technologies and practices as well as identifies interesting future approaches and requirements. The community is open to anyone to join and participate in, with most of the participation happens through build projects (such as Matterhorn) and the community mailing list (community@opencastproject.org).

Opencast was founded in 2006 by thirteen higher education institutions to build open source solutions for academic video management.  Together, with the help of funding from the Andrew W. Mellon and the William and Flora Hewlett Foundations, the Opencast project has grown Matterhorn from a small incubator project into an enterprise-strength solution used at 28 institutes of higher learning world wide.

Opencast, and the Matterhorn project, are sponsored by commercial partners who offer consulting, implementation, and hardware support for Opencast platforms:

http://opencast.org/matterhorn/vendors

Matterhorn development is funded by in-kind donations from our sponsors and partners, including:

http://opencast.org/matterhorn/community

